P2545R4 Read-Copy Update (RCU) (#6344)
cplusplus/draft: source/threads.tex

\effects
As if by \tcode{x.swap(y)}.
\end{itemdescr}

\rSec1[saferecl]{Safe reclamation}

\rSec2[saferecl.general]{General}

\pnum

> This clause contains safe-reclamation techniques, which are most

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Subclause \ref{saferecl} contains safe-reclamation techniques, which are most
```

frequently used to straightforwardly resolve access-deletion races.

\rSec2[saferecl.rcu]{Read-copy update (RCU)}

\rSec3[saferecl.rcu.general]{General}

\pnum
RCU is a synchronization mechanism
that can be used for linked data structures
that are frequently read, but seldom updated.
RCU does not provide mutual exclusion,
but instead allows the user to schedule specified actions
such as deletion at some later time.

\pnum
A class type \tcode{T} is \defn{rcu-protectable}

> if it has exactly one base class of type \tcode{rcu_obj_base<T,D>}
> for some \tcode{D}, and that base is public and non-virtual, and
> it has no base classes of type \tcode{rcu_obj_base<X,Y>}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
if it has exactly one base class of type \tcode{rcu_obj_base<T, D>}
for some \tcode{D}, and that base is public and non-virtual, and
it has no base classes of type \tcode{rcu_obj_base<X, Y>}
```

starts with a \tcode{lock} $L$ on \tcode{dom} and
ends with its corresponding \tcode{unlock} $U$.

\pnum
Given a region of RCU protection $R$ on a domain \tcode{dom} and
given an evaluation $E$ that scheduled another evaluation $F$ in \tcode{dom},
if $E$ does not strongly happen before the start of $R$,
the end of $R$ strongly happens before evaluating $F$.

\pnum
The evaluation of a scheduled evaluation is potentially concurrent with
any other scheduled evaluation.
Each scheduled evaluation is evaluated at most once.

\rSec3[rcu.syn]{Header \tcode{<rcu>} synopsis}

\indexheader{rcu}
\begin{codeblock}
namespace std {
  // \ref{saferecl.rcu.base}, class template \tcode{rcu_obj_base}
  template<class T, class D = default_delete<T>> class rcu_obj_base;

  // \ref{saferecl.rcu.domain}, class \tcode{rcu_domain}
  class rcu_domain;
  rcu_domain& rcu_default_domain() noexcept;
  void rcu_synchronize(rcu_domain& dom = rcu_default_domain()) noexcept;
  void rcu_barrier(rcu_domain& dom = rcu_default_domain()) noexcept;
  template<class T, class D = default_delete<T>>
    void rcu_retire(T* p, D d = D(), rcu_domain& dom = rcu_default_domain());
}
\end{codeblock}

> \rSec3[saferecl.rcu.base]{Class \tcode{rcu_obj_base}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
\rSec3[saferecl.rcu.base]{Class template \tcode{rcu_obj_base}}
```

\pnum
Objects of type \tcode{T} to be protected by RCU inherit from

> a specialization of \tcode{rcu_obj_base<T,D>}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the specialization of \tcode{rcu_obj_base<T, D>} for some \tcode{D}.
```

Author: I'm not sure this is an improvement.

Reviewer: `rcu_obj_base<T,D>` has no specialization.
The template `rcu_obj_base` does.

Reviewer: Another option is dropping the "of".
`rcu_obj_base<T, D>` is (the name of) a specialization.
```suggestion
a specialization \tcode{rcu_obj_base<T, D>}.
```
```suggestion
a specialization \tcode{rcu_obj_base<T, D>} for some \tcode{D}.
```

Reviewer 2: Yes, the "of" is off. The latter change seems good, I'll add it separately. Thanks!

Reviewer 2: Not that "objects [...] inherit" anything, anyway, rather than the object's _type_, but let's not go too far here.

Reviewer: Yeah, it should be "has a base subobject" or something along those lines.

\begin{codeblock}
namespace std {
  template<class T, class D = default_delete<T>>
  class rcu_obj_base {
  public:
    void retire(D d = D(), rcu_domain& dom = rcu_default_domain()) noexcept;
  protected:
    rcu_obj_base() = default;
    rcu_obj_base(const rcu_obj_base&) = default;
    rcu_obj_base(rcu_obj_base&&) = default;
    rcu_obj_base& operator=(const rcu_obj_base&) = default;
    rcu_obj_base& operator=(rcu_obj_base&&) = default;
    ~rcu_obj_base() = default;
  private:
    D @\exposid{deleter}@;            // \expos
  };
}
\end{codeblock}

\pnum
The behavior of a program that adds specializations for \tcode{rcu_obj_base}
is undefined.

\pnum
\tcode{T} may be an incomplete type.
It shall be complete before any member of the resulting specialization of
\tcode{rcu_obj_base} is referenced.

\pnum
\tcode{D} shall be a
function object type\iref{function.objects} for which,
given a value \tcode{d} of type \tcode{D} and
a value \tcode{ptr} of type \tcode{T*},
the expression \tcode{d(ptr)} is valid.

\pnum
\tcode{D} shall meet the requirements for
\oldconcept{DefaultConstructible} and \oldconcept{MoveAssignable}.

\pnum
If \tcode{D} is trivially copyable,

> all specializations of \tcode{rcu_obj_base<T,D>} are trivially copyable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the specialization \tcode{rcu_obj_base<T, D>} is trivially copyable.
```

Author: There are multiple T in view here, so plural seems correct.

Reviewer: I thought singular is preferable.
After surveying the few uses of "trivially copyable" in the library,
it's actually the other way around.
Please, mark this as resolved.

\begin{itemdecl}
void retire(D d = D(), rcu_domain& dom = rcu_default_domain()) noexcept;
\end{itemdecl}

\begin{itemdescr}
\pnum
\mandates
\tcode{T} is an rcu-protectable type.

\pnum
\expects
\tcode{*this} is
a base class subobject of an object \tcode{x} of type \tcode{T}.

> The member function \tcode{rcu_obj_base<T,D>::retire}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The member function \tcode{rcu_obj_base<T, D>::retire}
```

was not invoked on \tcode{x} before.

> The assignment to \exposid{deleter} does not throw an exception.

Reviewer: I don't know about RCU.
Is this the real requirement (because RCU somehow doesn't mix with exceptions)?
Or does it actually mean "does not exit via an exception"?
Reading the _Effects_ below, I assume it's the latter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The assignment to \exposid{deleter} does not exit via an exception.
```

\pnum
\effects
Evaluates \tcode{\exposid{deleter} = std::move(d)} and
schedules the evaluation of
the expression \tcode{\exposid{deleter}(\newline addressof(x))}
in the domain \tcode{dom};
the behavior is undefined if that evaluation exits via an exception.
May invoke scheduled evaluations in \tcode{dom}.

\begin{note}
If such evaluations acquire resources held across any invocation of
\tcode{retire} on \tcode{dom}, deadlock can occur.
\end{note}
\end{itemdescr}

\rSec3[saferecl.rcu.domain]{Class \tcode{rcu_domain}}

\rSec4[saferecl.rcu.domain.general]{General}

\pnum
This class meets the requirements of
\oldconcept{Lockable}\iref{thread.req.lockable.req} and
provides regions of RCU protection.

\begin{example}
\begin{codeblock}
std::scoped_lock<rcu_domain> rlock(rcu_default_domain());
\end{codeblock}
\end{example}

\begin{codeblock}

> class rcu_domain {
> public:
>   rcu_domain(const rcu_domain&) = delete;
>   rcu_domain& operator=(const rcu_domain&) = delete;
> 
>   void lock() noexcept;
>   bool try_lock() noexcept;
>   void unlock() noexcept;
> };
> 
> rcu_domain& rcu_default_domain() noexcept;

Reviewer: Remove function present in the synopsis,
indent 2 spaces, and
wrap in `namespace std`.
```suggestion
namespace std {
  class rcu_domain {
  public:
    rcu_domain(const rcu_domain&) = delete;
    rcu_domain& operator=(const rcu_domain&) = delete;
  
      void lock() noexcept;
      bool try_lock() noexcept;
      void unlock() noexcept;
  };
}
```

Author: rcu_domain& rcu_default_domain() noexcept;

went missing

Reviewer: Yes. It's in the header synopsis.

Reviewer 2: I'll reorganize this a bit.

(possibly nested) regions of RCU protection.

\rSec4[saferecl.rcu.domain.members]{Member functions}

\indexlibrarymember{lock}{rcu_domain}%
\begin{itemdecl}
void lock() noexcept;
\end{itemdecl}

\begin{itemdescr}
\pnum
\effects
Opens a region of RCU protection.

\pnum
\remarks
Calls to \tcode{lock}
do not introduce a data race\iref{intro.races} involving \tcode{*this}.
\end{itemdescr}

\indexlibrarymember{try_lock}{rcu_domain}%
\begin{itemdecl}
bool try_lock() noexcept;
\end{itemdecl}

\begin{itemdescr}
\pnum
\effects
Equivalent to \tcode{lock()}.

\pnum
\returns
\tcode{true}.
\end{itemdescr}

\indexlibrarymember{unlock}{rcu_domain}%
\begin{itemdecl}
void unlock() noexcept;
\end{itemdecl}

\begin{itemdescr}
\pnum
\expects
A call to \tcode{lock}
that opened an unclosed region of RCU protection
is sequenced before the call to \tcode{unlock}.

\pnum
\effects
Closes the unclosed region of RCU protection
that was most recently opened.
May invoke scheduled evaluations in \tcode{*this}.

\pnum
\begin{note}
If such evaluations acquire resources
held across any invocation of \tcode{unlock} on \tcode{*this},
deadlock can occur.
\end{note}

> Calls to \tcode{unlock} do not introduce a data race involving \tcode{*this}.

Reviewer: Is it intentional that this is part of the _Effects_
and not in _Remarks_, like the previous member function?

Reviewer 2: Fixing, thanks!

\end{itemdescr}

\indexlibraryglobal{rcu_barrier}%
\begin{itemdecl}
void rcu_barrier(rcu_domain& dom = rcu_default_domain()) noexcept;
\end{itemdecl}

\begin{itemdescr}
\pnum
\effects
May evaluate any scheduled evaluations in \tcode{dom}.
For any evaluation that happens before the call to \tcode{rcu_barrier} and
that schedules an evaluation $E$ in \tcode{dom},
blocks until $E$ has been evaluated.

\pnum
\sync
The evaluation of any such $E$
strongly happens before the return from \tcode{rcu_barrier}.

\begin{note}
A call to \tcode{rcu_barrier} does not imply
a call to \tcode{rcu_synchronize} and vice versa.
\end{note}
\end{itemdescr}

\indexlibraryglobal{rcu_retire}%
\begin{itemdecl}
template<class T, class D = default_delete<T>>
void rcu_retire(T* p, D d = D(), rcu_domain& dom = rcu_default_domain());
\end{itemdecl}

\begin{itemdescr}
\pnum
\mandates
\tcode{is_move_constructible_v<D>} is \tcode{true} and
the expression \tcode{d(p)} is well-formed.

\pnum
\expects
\tcode{D} meets the \oldconcept{MoveConstructible} and
\oldconcept{Destructible} requirements.

\pnum
\effects
May allocate memory.
It is unspecified whether the memory allocation

> is performed by invoking \tcode{operator} \tcode{new}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is performed by invoking \tcode{\keyword{operator} \keyword{new}}.
```
